ORB-SLAM3 ROS 2 AND GAZEBO WORK REPORT
Date: 17 September 2026

1. Purpose

The goal was to add ORB-SLAM3 to the ROS 2 Humble workspace and connect it
to a simulated ground rover. The finished setup provides a Gazebo rover,
stereo cameras, an IMU, automatic or keyboard driving, ORB-SLAM3 tracking,
and RViz2 visualization.

2. Software added

The ORB_SLAM3_ROS2 wrapper was brought into the workspace and connected to
the ORB-SLAM3 library. A workspace-local Pangolin build was used because a
different Pangolin installation in /usr/local depended on an unavailable
OpenEXR version.

A new ROS 2 package named orbslam3_rover_sim was created. It contains the
rover model, test world, stereo and IMU calibration, launch file, automatic
drive controller, keyboard controller, frame alignment node, and RViz2
configuration.

3. Wrapper review and corrections

The original wrapper contained machine-specific Foxy and Python paths. It
also assumed a fixed ORB-SLAM3 location. These assumptions were replaced
with CMake options and workspace-relative discovery.

Node ownership and shutdown behavior were corrected. The image and IMU
synchronization thread now stops and joins cleanly. Buffer access is
protected, command-line arguments are checked before use, image conversion
errors are handled, and ROS message timestamps use stable numeric
conversion.

The wrapper now publishes ROS pose and path messages. ORB-SLAM optical
coordinates are converted to ROS REP-103 coordinates. Inertial startup
poses are excluded because ORB-SLAM3 changes scale and gravity alignment
during initialization. This prevents false vertical path segments.

4. Rover simulation

The simulated rover uses differential drive, two synchronized grayscale
cameras, and an IMU. The calibration file matches the simulated camera
intrinsics, stereo baseline, image size, frame rate, and camera-to-IMU
transform.

The default automatic motion is a circle. Continuous translation and
rotation provide better visual and inertial excitation than alternating
straight motion and turns in place. A startup delay lets the rover settle
onto the ground before wheel commands begin.

5. Visualization

RViz2 shows the rover model, ORB-SLAM3 path, sparse map points, left camera,
right camera, and a tracking image with current ORB features marked in
green.

The sparse map is published as sensor_msgs/PointCloud2 on
/orbslam3/map_points. A camera-height offset places the estimated floor on
the RViz grid. The rover path is planar because this platform is constrained
to the ground.

The orb_map to odom transform is calculated from timestamp-matched rover and
SLAM poses after inertial initialization. This keeps the green SLAM path and
the displayed rover motion in the same visual frame.

The wheel odometry display was removed from RViz2. It was useful during
comparison and debugging, but it is not an ORB-SLAM3 input. Its covariance
graphics added clutter without helping normal operation.

6. Launcher

The executable script orbslam3_gazebo.sh provides one entry point for build
and launch operations. It accepts true or false options for Gazebo GUI,
RViz2, keyboard teleoperation, automatic driving, and the native Pangolin
viewer. It also supports circle or square automatic motion, a build option,
and a dry-run option.

The script safely sources ROS setup files when shell nounset checking is
enabled. It selects the workspace-local ORB-SLAM3 and Pangolin libraries,
uses separate ROS and Gazebo log directories, and starts a virtual display
for headless operation.

Example:

  cd ~/ros2_ws/src
  ./orbslam3_gazebo.sh --gui false --rviz true --teleop false

7. Tests performed

The two ROS packages built successfully with colcon. Headless integration
runs confirmed rover spawning, stereo images, IMU data, vocabulary loading,
map creation, visual-inertial bundle adjustment, frame alignment, loop
detection, and clean shutdown.

A live sparse map message contained 617 points during one check. The left,
right, and feature-tracking image topics each had an active publisher. The
tracking image used BGR8 encoding.

8. Remaining considerations

ORB-SLAM3 needs motion before its inertial estimate becomes valid, so the
green path and aligned rover view appear after initialization rather than
immediately at startup. The sparse point cloud represents tracked visual
features, not a dense depth reconstruction. Tracking quality will still
depend on visible texture, lighting, correct calibration, and sufficiently
varied rover motion.
